optimistic locking and transactionless exaplained (#4089)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/reference/database-migration.md

With no transaction in KV Store, if for example the `Branch` creation fails, it will leave the `Repository` without an initial `Branch` (or a `Branch` at all), yet the `Repository` will be accessible. Trying to delete the `Repository` as a response to `Branch` creation failure is ony a partial solution as this operation can fail as well.
To mitigate this we introduced a per-`Repository`-partition, which holds all repository related objects (the `Branch` and `Commit` in this scenario). The partition key can only be derived from the specific`Repository` instance itself. In addition we first create the `Repository` objects, the `Commit` and the `Branch`, under the `Repository`'s partition key, and then the `Repository` is created. The `Repository` and its objects will be accessible only after a successful creation of all 3 entities. A failure in this flow might leave some dangling objects, but consistency is maintained.

> The amount of such dangling objects is not expected to be significant, and we plan to implement a cleaning algorithm to keep our KV Store neat and clean

Reviewer: Consider removing this.  It depends on the workload.  Workloads that create many temporary objects where they write, or that write and then overwrite existing objects, will generate dangling objects.  It is hard for us to know what users run.

Author: @arielshaqed - this one is specifically reagrding a failure with repository creation, in which we can have a dangling branch and commit, at most. It also relies on the (maybe wrong) assumptions that repository creation is not something that users do periodically. 
Is that assumption wrong?
Do you still think we are better off without this last sentence?
Thanks

Reviewer: Thanks for the explanation!  You're right (of course).

In order to store ref store objects (that is `Repositories`, `Branches`, `Commits`, `Tags`, and `Uncommitted Objects`), lakeFS implements another layer over the generic KV Store, which supports serialization and deserialization of these objects as [protobuf](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protocol_Buffers). As this layer relies on the generic interface of the KV Store layer, it is totally agnostic to whichever store implementation is in use, gaining our users the maximal flexibility

For further reading, please refer to our [KV Design](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/blob/master/design/accepted/metadata_kv/index.md)

### Optimistic Locking with KV

One important key difference between SQL databases and Key Value Store is the ability to lock resources. While this is a common practice with relational databases, Key Value stores lack this ability. Let us take a look at a common lakeFS flow, a `Commit`. During this flow, several ref store operations are performed:
* All relevant (`Branch` correlated) uncommitted objects are collected and marked as committed 
* A new `Commit` object is created
* The relevant `Branch` is updated to point to the new commit

> The `Commit` flow includes multiple database accesses and modifications, and is very sensitive to concurrent executions: If 2 `Commit` flows run in parallel, we cannot control which one will update the `Branch` last and we cannot guarantee correctness of the data. `lakeFS` with PostgreSQL solved it simply by locking the `Branch` for the entire `Commit` operation, which prevented concurrent execution of such flows.

Reviewer: Perhaps we can rephrase positively? Something like
```suggestion
The `Commit` flow includes multiple database accesses and modifications, and is very sensitive to concurrent executions: If 2 `Commit` flows run in parallel, we must guarantee correctness of the data. `lakeFS` with PostgreSQL simply locks the `Branch` for the entire `Commit` operation, preventing concurrent execution of such flows.
```
And then explaining what kv does makes it clear it's an alternative.

> Now, with KV Store replacing the SQL database, this easy solution is no longer available. Instead, we implemented an [Optimistic Locking](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optimistic_concurrency_control) algorithm, which leverages the KV Store `Compare-and-Set` (`CaS`) functionality to remember the `Branch` state at the beginning of the `Commit` flow, and updating the branch at the end, only if it remains unchanged, using `CaS`. Before sampling the `Branch` another update, of the `Branch`'s `StagingToken`, is made, and so, if another `Commit` is already running in parallel, it will fail the final step, of updating the `Branch`, as it was already changed. If 2 commits do run in parallel there are only 2 possible outcomes:

Author: Fixed

1. Either 1 of the `Commits` manages to start, sample the `Branch` state, modify the `StagingToken`, create a new `Commit` and use `Cas` to find out that the branch was not modified and update it, and so it succeeds and causing the other `Commit` to fail, or
2. Both `Commits` interfere with each other, and both will fail, as  depicted in the following scenario:
  * `Commit` A sets the `StagingToken` to val1 and samples the `Branch`,
  * `Commit` B sets the `StagingToken` to val2 and samples the `Branch`,
  * `Commit` A finishes, tries to update the `Branch` and fails due to the recent modification by `Commit` B,
  * `Commit` A is retired, setting `StagingToken` to val3 and samples the `Branch`
  * `Commit` B finishes, tries to update the `Branch` and fails due to the recent modification by `Commit` A,
  * And so on...

> At some point, as retries will be exhausted, commits will succeed, if not earlier, but this was definitely something that had to be taken into consideration when designing our KV Store. You can read more on the Commit Flow in the [dedicated section in the KV Design](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/blob/master/design/accepted/metadata_kv/index.md#graveler-metadata---branches-and-staged-writes)

Reviewer: When phrased like this it is very worrying, and makes it sound as though workflows that attempt to commit periodically will never work.
At the very least I would explain that commits are idempotent, so as soon as one succeeds we advance, and other commits only need to commit work started after that successful commit.
Otherwise starvation would be inevitable.

Author: @arielshaqed - AFAICT, starvation is possible (probably not inevitable).
The best thing I could come up with is the remove the last bullet "and so on..." which implies endlessness, and change the next line to:
"The first commit to succeed, releases this mutual interference, and the next commits can continue uninterrupted."

WDYT?
I wuold love to adopt any better suggestion

Reviewer: Either leave it alone ("eventually a commit succeeds"), or point to #3586.  The current makes me feel really bad -- it gives little hope, but also doesn't say we know how to fix it when that becomes necessary.  So I'd prefer to go in either direction.

Author: @arielshaqed - rephrased as we eariler discessed

A brand new `Repository` has 3 objects: The `Repository` object itself, an initial `Branch` object and an initial `Commit`, which the `Branch` points to. With SQL DB, it was as simple as creating all 3 objects in the DB under one transaction (at this order). Any failure resulted in a rollback and no redundant leftovers in our DB.
Now, with KV Store, the transaction ability is gone, and so each operation for itself, and each can fail. Now, if, for example, the `Repository` creation fails, it is not much of a problem, as this is the first entity to be created, but what happens if the `Branch` creation fails? It will leave the `Repository` without an initial `Branch` (or a `Branch` at all), yet, the `Repository` will be accessible. Trying to delete the `Repository` as a response to `Branch` creation failure is ony a partial solution as the `Repository` deletion can fail too.

> In order to overcome this obstacle we introduced a per-`Repository`-partition, which holds all repository related objects (the `Branch` and `Commit` in this scenario). The partition ket can only be derived from the `Repository` object it self. In addition we reversed the order of objects creations, where the `Commit` and the `Branch` are created, under the `Repository`'s partition key, and the `Repository` is created last. The `Repository`, and as a result its partition, will be accessible only after a successful creation of all 3 entities, and every failure might leave some dangling objects, but the consistency remains in place, as these objects are not reachable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To mitigate this we introduced a per-`Repository`-partition, which holds all repository related objects (the `Branch` and `Commit` in this scenario). The partition key can only be derived from the specific`Repository` instance itself. In addition we first create the `Repository` objects, the `Commit` and the `Branch`, under the `Repository`'s partition key, and then the `Repository` is created. The `Repository` and its objects will be accessible only after a successful creation of all 3 entities. A failure in this flow might leave some dangling objects, but consistency is maintained.
```
